From Hanselman it's dot com
is Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one Oh five
recorded live Wednesday, March 19,
2008. Support for Hansel minutes
is provided by Tellerik rad
controls, the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdotptelerik.com.
Support is also provided by.net
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
developer Rocky, lot gap about
the myriad of choices available
for accessing data in your
application. 10 business objects. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman and
this is another episode of
Hanselminutes and I'm sitting here@mixoheightwithrockylacaauthorofcsla.net
and object luminary. I just
made that up. Well, thank
you. It's nice. But thanks
for hanging out with me
here today. We were talking
earlier about this kind of
cacophony, this large amount of
talk going around about how
to get information out of
databases. It's it's Dow it's
data access layer mania. Right
now we've got linked to
SQL LinkedIn entities. We've got
ORM mappers, like the Wilson
mapper, and we've got in
hibernate and we've got csla.net.
Is that really are there
really this many ways to
get information out of a
database and into an object?
Apparently two, I need that
many ways. I can't believe
that anybody could need this
many ways. Now. I think
that we settled on a
pattern in the late nineties
with ado, right? Where were
you said, well, there's connections,
commands, parameters and ado.net. We
really carried that forward. Totally.
And you know that at
that level, nobody seems to
be arguing anymore, right? Everything.
Yeah. I mean, it's pretty
straight forward. Most people will
do a code generator like
code Smith, pointed a database.
They'll use SQL data reader
and you'll see a lot
of code that's like, I
call it left hand, right
hand, you know, objects on
the left database, on the
right or database in the
right objects in the left.
Yep. And they'll basically go
and say, first name is
data reader at zero. They'll
just do that. It's very
rote boring code. Yeah. There
is not a whole lot
of fun to it. And
yet if you're using the
direct connection command data reader.
Oh, that's fast. Oh yeah.
Right. Cause I mean, you're
as close to the bottom
as you can get in.net
and that's very, very fast.
And if you, even, if
you have to write the
code, it's not hard, it's
just boring. Right. And if
you COVID Janet, you know,
and so I don't think
there's anything wrong with that,
but then there's the dataset.
Right. Which then brought this
kind of, not quite a
database into memory and let
us query it. Okay. And
that's not bad. I mean,
it was like the record
set result, set, whatever from
the nineties only kind of
on steroids really. I mean
a really nice, complete implant.
Right. We used to call
it, we had ATO disconnected
records that's before that. Yeah.
and so this was,
yeah. You know, basically that
same thing on the better,
you know, more powerful. And
yet at the same time,
it turns out that the
data sets are, are kind
of heavy, especially in an
end tier setting and they
aren't super flexible. So, and
don't offer, and then of
course, people like me are
running around telling everybody, well,
you should really be using
objects. Right. And so then
there's this conflict with objects
and data sets. And do
I get a data set
and then put the data
in an object? Or do
I have my objects hold
datasets? Or, but I think
we're kind of collectively arriving
at the point now where
we're saying, well, we don't
really necessarily need the data
set, especially with link. Although
we do have things like
LinkedIn data set, I mean
there's ways to go. That's
true. But I mean, you
can't just ignore the past
either. Yeah. Right. I mean,
you can't just wake up
one day and go, Oh
yeah. All that code you've
been writing for the past
seven years or five for
what, you know, it's, you
know, throw it away. You
know, you can't do that,
especially if you're Microsoft. Right.
Exactly. And so you have
to have that to bridge,
but the reality is that
that link and I don't
mean link to SQL, I
mean, link to objects, basically
Link as a structured non
tunneled way to query objects.
Right. I mean, not a
tunnel in the sense that
the syntax doesn't live in
a string. Yup. Yup, exactly.
And so at that level
link, it gives you everything
that you wanted out of
a dataset starting filtering, but
it does it in a
much bigger, better, more flexible
manner. Right. And lets you
join across multiple data sources
and all sorts of other
cool stuff. Right. And so
all of a sudden the
data sets not so even
attractive anymore because it doesn't
offer any value that you
couldn't have gotten better through
link. Right. Right. And so
now I think you start
to say, well, all these
people that have been running
around for a long time
now building all object, relational
mapping or tools like Paul Wilson
or you know, a lot
of these things that take
data out of the database
and give it to you
in an object form, start
to look even more attractive.
Right. Because before you would
get these objects, like I
built, I mean at my
last company we built a
code generator, me, we were
actually pulling it out of
a database, into a system.
It lived as brackets for
a moment and then into
objects. And we found that
once we got those objects,
we were always trying to
query them because the data
didn't come back exactly the
way we wanted it. Yup.
Right. And of course link
solves that problem. So anything
that brings something back, cause
it's an object is suddenly
not only attractive, but very
viable. Yep. And so then,
then I think, you know,
you start looking at all
these different third party or
M is open source or
not some of which have
been around for a while.
Yeah. And you know, Microsoft
certainly link in the entity
framework are not their first
run at this, but it's
the first run that's actually
made it out. Right. Link.
Yeah. Entity framework isn't technically
out yet. So you know,
any minute now, arguably it
could go away, but Tricia
let's hope not. But, but
I think there's a commonality
across all of these tools
that know how to put
this. So if you step
back and look at the
object oriented design thing in
a, in a bigger picture,
right? The object relational mapping
problem is really big and,
and very, very complicated because
ideally when you're creating your
objects, you're doing it. Of
course, this is my view.
You're going to design your
objects. I'm using responsibility driven
design where the objects are
defined by behaviors within a
use case, not by the
database. Right. And this is
the issue about the physical
layout of a relational database
and those things like, you
know, how cardinality works and
those things that are very
much database focused things and
how entities relate to each
other are, is very different
from how an object graph
works. And very often, if
you are an object person,
you think about modeling your
system in terms of objects,
you want those objects to
reflect a logical reality. Yes,
that's right. Not the physical
reality of the database. Yup.
And, and so you end
up in all sorts of
weird, almost cognitive dissonance type
things, especially if you're The
other person impedance mismatch there.
Yeah. Well, and that's a,
that's a David Taylor, I think
coined that term. Yeah. Not
really. It's it's it seems
like it's in the, it's
in the ether. It's one
of those things that's just
out there. Yeah. He's his
very nice thin book called
object oriented technology, a manager's
guide and wrote it. I
don't even know early nineties.
I think really it's a
great read. Even if you're
a developer, even though it
says it's a manager's book,
it's a good book to
read. Cause it's got a
lot of great concept stuff.
Yeah. But, and then he
talks about this, what we're
talking about here. Right. And
so the, the, the limitation
with all of these ORM
tools is that they create
objects that look like data
structures. Right. And that's not
bad. Right. Cause it's, it's
a whole lot easier to
deal with data looking objects
than data sets or whatever.
Right. Right. That's a huge
step forward, but it still
doesn't really get you where
you want to be, which
is just directly mapping data
from a database into logical
objects that reflect your use
cases. Right. And which, which,
and so like CSLA for
instance, sits at that top
level. My whole goal was
CSLA is to enable you
to build object models that
reflect your use cases. So
you explicitly kind of issue
the idea that this is
a direct mapping from the
database and you really want
it to look more like,
I mean, it's not, it's
not bottom up. It's not
from the database up. It's
from, you know, the business
problem. That would be the
ideal. Okay. And a lot
of people use CSLA to
create effectively entity objects. Okay.
It works for that, but
that's not why I'm creating
it. It's not what I
think people should, I assume
you made it because you
needed to use it for
work. Well, that's true. Right.
And, but I also have
kind of a purist and
you know, I try not,
I have heard that you're
a bit of a purist,
So, you know, so I
look at this and I
say, well, all of the,
you know, N hibernate entity
framework linked to sequel, all
these things are beautiful replacements
for ado.net sitting behind the
CSLA or the, you know,
in my world. Yeah, sure.
In a world where everyone
uses your tool. Sure. That's
how it works. Yeah. But
honestly, if you're creating services,
so you're the author of
services. You maybe don't need
a lot of rich business
object, domain object type stuff
like CSLA gives you. And
so you might just directly
build your service on top
of a set of, you
know, linked to SQL or
entity or, you know, whatever.
Well, this is a good
point though. Let's let's let's
let me back up for
a second. Let me put
this in concrete terms. So
we don't lose people with,
with LinkedIn equal. I sit
in visual studio, go file
new application. I see my
database in the server Explorer
and I drag a few
tables over and then magically,
I get a product object
and a category object. And
it looks a lot like
the database. Yes that's, that's
happens in a visual designer
in this cogeneration that happens
in the background. They give
me crud, they give me
create, read, update, and delete,
and a philosophy that very,
very much reflects the physicality
of the database linked to
entities. And the entity framework
gives you a slightly different
design service that allows you
to have an additional layer
of abstraction, as well as
a, a little bit deeper
stack. And I could have,
for example, a product object
that went to three or
four tables in the database
rather than one. So then
those are, and then linked
to those objects. So I
get these objects. I can
run LINQ queries on them.
After the fact with linked
to SQL, I can run
LINQ queries in SQL is
generated. I get it. I
get a free Dow, a
free database access layer. That's
the perception, right? But then
we start thinking about layers
versus tiers. And I usually
use the term that a
layer is a logical thing
and a tear as a
physical thing, meaning that this
object exists on that machine
over there. And now we're
talking about services. Hi, this
is Carl Franklin, the producer of
Hansel minutes with a message
from Tellerik. Do you know
how to build web 2.0
Ajax applications with web 1.0
components, right? You just can't
in order to have next
generation web apps, you need
next generation components. And that's
exactly what our friends at
Tellerik have for you. Their
upcoming product code name, rad
controls Prometheus's is a huge
pack of web controls built
on top of Microsoft ASP,
net Ajax, which will add
previously impossible performance in interactivity
to your next project. Just
listen to this. The new
controls mirror, the ASP net
Ajax API. So development is
straight forward. Client scripts are
shared. So loading time is
pretty much instant. And if
you just set a couple
of properties, you'll be able
to automatically bind to web
services for even more efficient
operation. After all the facts
speak for themselves, the new
rad editor for ASP net
Ajax loads up to four
times faster than before. Similarly,
rad grid handles thousands of
records in mere milliseconds. But
again, it's best to try
for yourself visit telerik.com/asp, net
Ajax, and download a trial.
And don't forget to thank
them for supporting Hansel minutes.
So linked to SQL doesn't
initially lend itself to being
in an alternative tier by
itself. You can't just push
a button and say, now
you can be in the
business tier of a whole
series of other machines. No,
that's right. Then you start
thinking about things like what
was code named as Storia
having data services that live
in alternative tier? Yes. That
was the, now the ado.net
data services was, I suppose
we'll have to do a
whole other show. Yup. But
that's cool stuff. That stuff
I understand. So with CSLA
what do I do? Well,
the CSLA worldview, the, the,
When I sit down and
go file new and I
have a database, what happens
or do I don't have
it yet? What I've been
doing lately is I create
my CSLA objects, my business
objects using again, responsibility use
case design, you know, And
there's tooling for this, I
assume. Well, not so much.
Oh really? Okay. So how
am I making these objects?
Visual studio is your friend.
Okay. So I write the
code myself, right? Yeah. You
got to like writing code
now to be fair though,
there are quite a set
of code generators for CSLA
code Smith has got some
templates, my generation, there's a
couple of commercial offerings, you
know, so you can go
open source our commercial to
buy generators that will create
a lot of the code
for you for, for these
business objects. Okay. And what
the, what about the wa
I know what linked to
SQL logics look like. What
about them makes them special?
They inter implement an interface.
They have attributes. They do
ride from certain base classes.
Well, there's really two things
That CSLA does at a,
at a high level. One
is that it supports the
creation of a rich user
interface through the support for
data binding, integrated support for
validation, a business rule engine
and an authorization engine. And
so all of these things,
when you build a business
object using CSLA, the object
ends up in capsulated, not
only data, but more importantly
behaviors, including things like validation,
rules, calculations, authorization, even down
to the property level. And
then when you buying these
objects, especially to windows forms
where the data binding is
really robust, right? Then you
get automatically get all of
this data binding support so
that as the user tabs
off each field, that field
values validated the, if it's
incorrect, you get the error
provider icon. If they're not
authorized to see it, they
won't see it. If they're
not authorized to change it,
they'll see it, but they
can't edit it. And this
is just all essentially automatic.
There's very little code in
the UI to do that.
And they also support web
forms, data binding, which isn't
quite as robust, you know,
it was windows, but with
the same object can be
used behind windows. Our web,
There could be some really
cool stuff with ASP, net
MVC, and CSLA working together.
So this is interesting. So
the fact that you're bringing
up all of these very,
very user-focused and very user
interface, focused things makes me
really understand the separation between
CSLA. It's not a dowel.
They really are business objects
and they touch as well.
As I like to say,
they touch the glass of
the user's experience. They're literally
touching the monitor because these
objects are talking to the
fields that they interact with
directly. I wouldn't do data
binding any data binding. I
mean, if you going back
to what you were saying
about layering know, there's a
presentation layer that could be
web windows WPF working on
a CSLA for silver light.
So, you know, in the
relatively near future, it could
be silver light. Cool. And
you know, and so if
you look at it from
a model view controller perspective,
the CSLA objects, the business
objects are the model, But
they're the model. Are they,
they view data. Well, cause
there's a, there's a lot
of stuff. Well, it's somewhat
challenging, honestly, because the
has an, I think an
odd way of separating things
out. In some sense, you've
got some sort of a
view that the user has.
Right, right. And that's a
web form or a windows
form or whatever. Right. Right.
And then you've got a
controller that establishes the relationship
or the presenter or whatever
that establishes the relationship between
that view and your underlying,
you know, model Underlying model.
But then the big question
is whether or not you
decide to pass the objects
from your model, through the
controller and into the view,
or whether you choose to
transform them, that's the trick.
Right? And so if you
like data binding or more,
let's flip it around. If
you, if you want to
minimize the amount of code
that you have to write
data binding does that for
you. Right. Cause it does
all of this hookup stuff,
especially in windows, but WPF
is getting there pretty rapidly
with support, for error, validation,
and so forth. And so
if your objects let's, let's,
I look at them as
being the model. If your
objects are really rich and,
and encapsulate all of this
stuff by themselves, then ideally
your controller is pretty thin
and just does sets up
the data binding relationship coordinator.
Right? Exactly. Yes. I realize
people philosophically sometimes go, Oh,
we don't want to do
that well, okay. But that
just means you're writing a
lot of code that Microsoft
already wrote for you in
the form of data binding.
But there's also a lot
of philosophical questions that brings
up because a lot of
people are moving towards this
notion of services that are
smart, that represent the verbs
in the actions. Well, objects
are really becoming in their,
in their perception stupider. Yes,
that's right. The more classic
old people. And I would
think of you as being
more of a, an old
practitioner would really prefer the
objects to be very intelligent.
Well, the controller would be
more of a Coordinator. The
thing is early in my
career, I did Fortran. And
whether you call them services
or procedures, it's the same
thing. And been there done
that. I don't really feel
the need to go back
to passing a bunch of
dumb parameter data into a
procedure that we now call
a service. So it sounds
froofy, you know, and not
that that's a bad model.
I mean, I I'm being
dismissive. Certainly the thing is
pick a religion and be
excited about it and respect
it. And I think that
people should pick this. What
makes them happy? The, I
don't even know if I
agree with that because at
an architectural level, there are
really good reasons why you
might use the kinds of
objects that CSLA enables. That's
pretty, that's a very dogmatic
view though. Right? Well, it
is, but it's true. And
then there are also really
good reasons why you would
go down a service approach
or right. They are. And
in any mid to large
sized system, odds are, you're
going to need some of
each. Yeah. And then, so
it's kind of naive to
think that you're going to
Ooh, be all, I'm all,
I'm only object That's right.
That's a very valid point.
It really is about picking
the right tool for the
solution. I mean, I tend
to lean more towards the
service side, but then I
tend to work on large
systems. So, you know, if
I were to go and
write some tray icon that,
that did something in wind
forms, if I try to
design it like a large
surface oriented system, I probably
would not succeed Well. And
I think even if you're
creating a true service oriented,
you know, message based asynchronous
system at the edge, you
still have to give the
user a good experience. And
that means that at the
edge of that, you have
to have some level of
business logic running as close
to the user as you
possibly can, because your only
alternative otherwise is that the
user going to enter the
data and then you have
to route it through is
probably some relatively expensive services
to find out if the
data was any good or
that's bad. Yeah. And so
even if you become totally
SOA, something like CSLA with
its rich objects that do
all the validation and all
this other cool stuff almost
for free at the UI
level are really good to
create the applications that are
at the edge. And then
instead of talking to a
database, they just talked to
a bunch of services. Right.
So it's kind of, I
still see that as a
very natural fit. Okay. So
trying to bring it full
circle, where does CSLA fit
in a world where I
have linked to sequel? Is
it it's downstream and linked
to SQL is the dowel
that feeds the CSLA objects.
Yeah. Although I would actually
flip it around cause I
always see the objects as
the center of the universe.
So you build your object,
your, your domain object, the
way you want it to
look you based on your
use cases and yep, exactly.
And those objects then support
any, ideally any of your
UI options, windows, web, WPF
Silverlight, and then they consume
their data. Right. They do
their crud operations, basically using
some sort of data access
layer and linked to sequel
is in my view, a
really great way to build
that data access layer. That's
what I've been doing lately.
And it's, I mean, it's
got that beautiful designer, it's
got started procedure support. And
so you've got this really
nice, easy way of sitting
down and creating a, a
dowel with very little effort.
Do you have some example
apps? Have you done the
canonical app, the Northwind app,
the adventure works app. I've
got a reference app for
CSLA called project tracker that
uses that the current version
of it, because I'm just
about to release CSLA version
3.5 within the next say
month or so. Cool. And
so the project tracker reference
app actually does all the
things that I'm talking about
here and does in fact
use linked to SQL for
it's Dell. Very cool. Okay.
But doesn't this feel like?
I mean, I know that
these are complex systems and
there's a lot of work
to be done, but I
think I would spend a
lot of time writing left
hand, right hand code as
I take object B and
put bits in the object
day. It seems a little
tedious as I'm shuffling stuff
back and forth. I mean,
I see that I get
a lot of benefits once
I get these into a
CLOC object CSLA object routers.
Right. I see that. I
get a lot of benefits
when I put these into
a CSLA object, but I
still have these other objects
sitting around and it just
doesn't feel very tidy to
me. Is that just something
I need to get over?
Well, I think so, honestly,
I don't even think of
the, the link to sequel
objects as being objects because
I didn't write them. They
don't, even to me, they
don't look like objects, they're
entities that are in memory
or in fact, they're there.
I do these really cool
link, select statements. Right. I
get back stuff and it
is true that you've got
a copy of those values
then, you know, but that's
the, we're back to something
that can be code generated.
Right. You're right. So you're
basically saying don't fool yourself,
even though they look like
objects that they, these are
not your business objects. Right.
Well, I think this is
the thing that if you
really buy into responsibility driven
design, then every object has
exactly one responsibility. And those
objects that link to sequel
is creating for you. They
have a responsibility to which
is to be shaped containers
for data, which is a
great responsibility. I love it,
but it's not the same
as a responsibility such as,
you know, representing a customer
and all of the associated
validation rules, right. Or representing
a sales order with all
of its line items and
pricing. And you're, you know,
that's a whole different thing
than just representing something that
contains data. Is there anything
that you've done to CSLA
to make the objects that
they, that you produce more
friendly to link or are
they linked, enabled by default?
Well, one of the big
things with CSLA 3.5 is
adding some support for link
and it's kind of a,
we're talking linked to objects
at this time. And I'm
wondering if then that blurs
the line and makes it
more difficult to well, So
it's an interesting thing because
CSLA includes a pretty rich
collection type. So not only
to support data binding and
in place editing and grids
and all that sort of
thing, but it understands and
interacts with its child objects.
And so an object that
belongs to a collection, you
know, there's, there's a relationship
there. And so when you
just pop along with link
and do a select statement
against one of these collections,
you get back always two
ways, right? Projection or non
projection. Maybe you can explain
that to them. And so
a projection query is where
you might do a select
and then you're only pulling
out two or three properties,
not the whole thing. Right.
And making an anonymous object,
The case. Yeah. They create
for you an anonymous object
in a new list and
that's all cool. Right. But
that's really Slack. And that
would lend itself to them
being bound to something within
a week. It does. Although
the data mining, the only
one way the data mining
that you get is not
as rich. Yeah. But where
it gets tricky is if
you do a non projection
query. So, so when you
do your, your select, you're
maybe doing a filter or
something, but you select the
whole object, the child object
out of the collection. Right.
Well, that child object, what
you get back from link
then is an innumerable of
that type CSLA type, which
is enabled for all future
Wild objects, which have a
relationship with their parent container,
the original list, and obviously
have no relationship to a
raw IEnumerable of T. And
so then you get into
these weird things like, so
then what do you do?
You take that IEnumerable of
tea and maybe you bind
it to a grid. And
the user starts entering new
rows in the grid. Right.
And they get added to
the IEnumerable, but they don't
get added to the real
list. And then when you
go to save your original
list, these, this data didn't
save and you're sitting here
going, Whoa, the user added
them. Why didn't they get
it out of work? How
are you going, enable a
scenario like that? Well, so
the, basically a CSLA and
now when you do a
non projection query against a
CSLA list, what you get
back is a, a rich
IEnumerable of T that understands
the CSLA relationships. And so
it's actually a live view
of the original list that's
sorted filtered or whatever, based
on your query. And so
now when you, when the
user, for instance, adds or
removes rows in this list,
it adds it to the
view, but it also adds
it to the original list.
And so you get this
kind of transparent flow through,
and I'm not the only
one working on this sort
of thing. And in fact,
much of what I'm describing
was written by a colleague
of mine, Aaron Erickson, who also
works for Magenic and Aaron
wrote a thing, an index
link service. So he it's
an open source project on
code Plex, or it just
adds indexing to link queries
against objects. But there's a
couple other people that are
doing synchronized LINQ query, similar
to sync link, like sync
link. And there's a concurrent
or continuous link. Maybe it's
continuous link is the other
one. It was a couple
of projects along this line.
They're doing much more than
I'm doing okay. Or they're
being much more aggressive. All
I wanted to do was
solve this one problem. So
I'll put all that information
in the show notes. So
where do people go and
find more about CSLA www.latika.net?
Will you spell that? It's
a L H O T
K a.net. Cool. I'll put
all that up in the
show notes. I really appreciate
you taking the time to
sit down with me here
at mix Rocky luck of
Hansel minutes. I'll see you
again next week.